Documentation for atlas (#54)
redbrick/docs: docs/webgroup/atlas.md

---
id: atlas
aliases:
  - Atlas
tags:
  - webgroup
  - website
title: Atlas
---

# Atlas (Redbrick Website)

> Atlas is Redbrick’s static website, built with [Eleventy (11ty)](https://www.11ty.dev/) and styled with Tailwind CSS + PostCSS. The site output is generated into `dist/` and can be served locally during development, or built into a production container served by Nginx.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Atlas is Redbrick's static website, built with [Eleventy (11ty)](https://www.11ty.dev/) and styled with Tailwind CSS + PostCSS. The site output is generated into `dist/` and can be served locally during development, or built into a production container served by Nginx.
```

## Quick links

> - Live site: [https://redbrick.dcu.ie](https://redbrick.dcu.ie)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Live site: <https://redbrick.dcu.ie>
```

## Tech stack / tooling

- **Node.js**: `^18.17 || ^20`
- **Package manager**: Yarn (`yarn@4.1.0`, via Corepack)
- **Static site generator**: Eleventy (`@11ty/eleventy`)
- **Templating**: Nunjucks (`.njk`) + Markdown (`.md`) + HTML
- **CSS**: Tailwind CSS + PostCSS (Autoprefixer)
- **Search**: Pagefind
- **Container build/runtime**: multi-stage Docker build (Node build → Nginx runtime)

> - **CI/CD**: GitHub Actions (build/publish + deploy)

Reviewer: Some links would go hard here

## Development

Install dependencies:

```bash
corepack enable
yarn
```

Run a dev server:

```bash
yarn dev
```

Build for production (outputs to `dist/`):

```bash
yarn build
```

## Build output

- Eleventy input: `src/site`

> - Eleventy output: `dist`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Eleventy output: `dist/`
```

(These are configured in `package.json` under the `eleventy.dir` section.)

## File structure breakdown

> > Note: `dist/` is generated at build time and is not committed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> [!NOTE]
> `dist/` is generated at build time and is not committed.
```

```text
.
├── .github/
│   ├── deploy/
│   │   ├── production.hcl          # Nomad job spec for production deployment
│   │   └── review.hcl              # Nomad job spec for review (branch) deployments
│   └── workflows/
│       ├── build.yml               # Build & publish Docker image to GHCR
│       └── deploy.yml              # Deploy workflow (prod + review environments)
├── eleventy/
│   ├── filters/
│   │   └── slugify.js              # Custom filter(s) for templates
│   ├── parsers/
│   │   └── markdown.js             # Markdown parser configuration
│   ├── plugins/
│   │   ├── git-build.js            # Build metadata from git
│   │   ├── navigation-render.js    # Navigation rendering helper
│   │   └── pagefind.js             # Pagefind integration
│   └── utils/                      # Eleventy utility code (helpers)
├── src/
│   ├── _data/                      # Eleventy data files (global/site data)
│   ├── _includes/                  # Includes/partials used by templates
│   ├── _layouts/                   # Layout templates
│   └── site/                       # Main Eleventy input directory

> │       ├── assets/                # Static assets (images, fonts, etc.)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
│       ├── assets/                 # Static assets (images, fonts, etc.)
```

│       ├── index.md                # Homepage content
│       ├── links.md                # Links page content
│       └── 404.md                  # 404 page content
├── .dockerignore
├── .editorconfig
├── .eleventy.js                    # Eleventy config entrypoint
├─  .eleventyignore
├── .gitattributes
├── .gitignore
├── Dockerfile                      # Multi-stage build (Node -> Nginx)
├── nginx.conf                      # Nginx config for serving the built site
├── postcss.config.js               # PostCSS configuration
├── tailwind.config.js              # Tailwind configuration
├── package.json                    # Scripts + dependencies + Eleventy directory config
├── yarn.lock
└── LICENSE
```

## Docker

A multi-stage Docker build is used:

1. **build stage**: installs deps + runs `yarn build` to generate `dist/`

> 2. **production stage**: serves `dist/` via `nginx`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. **Build stage**: installs deps + runs `yarn build` to generate `dist/`
2. **Production stage**: serves `dist/` via `nginx`
```

## Deployments (high-level)

- Docker images are built and published via GitHub Actions.
- Deployments use Nomad job specifications in `.github/deploy/` for:
    - **Production** (`production.hcl`)
    - **Review** per-branch (`review.hcl`)

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

## Running locally with Docker

To run the site locally in a Docker container (serving the production build via Nginx):

1. Build the Docker image:

```bash
docker build -t redbrick-atlas .
```
2. Run the container:

```bash
docker run -p 8080:80 redbrick-atlas
```

> 3. Access the site at `http://localhost:8080`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Access the site at [`http://localhost:8080`](http://localhost:8080).
```

> ```

Reviewer: add newline (I can't make this a review suggestion :c )

> [!NOTE]

> > When making changes note that the docker image will need to be rebuilt to see the changes reflected in the container.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> When making changes the docker image will need to be re-built and re-run to see the changes reflected in the container.
```

> ```

Reviewer: newline here too

## Creating a new page

1. Create a new Markdown file in `src/site/` (e.g., `src/site/new-page.md`).
2. Add front matter and content:

```markdown
---
layout: default.njk
---
<main>
    {% include "newpage.njk" %}
</main> 
```

> [!NOTE]

> > We advise using a nunjucks include for the page content to keep the Markdown file clean and focused on content, while the layout and styling can be handled in the included Nunjucks template.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> We advise using a [nunjucks include](https://mozilla.github.io/nunjucks/templating.html#include) for the page content to keep the Markdown file clean and focused on content, while the layout and styling can be handled in the included Nunjucks template.
```

3. Create the corresponding Nunjucks template in `src/_includes/` (e.g., `src/_includes/newpage.njk`) and add your HTML content there.
4. Link to the new page from the navigation or other pages as needed.

Navigation links are defined in `src/_data/site.yml` under navigation and global taking a `- text` which is the text shown in the nav and a `link` which is the path to the page (e.g., `/new-page` for `src/site/new-page.md`).

> 
> ## Outside contributions
> - Contributions to the website are always welcome!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Outside contributions

- Contributions to the website are always welcome!
```

│   └── site/                       # Main Eleventy input directory
│       ├── assets/                 # Static assets (images, fonts, etc.)
│       ├── index.md                # Homepage content
│       ├── links.md                # Links page content
│       └── 404.md                  # 404 page content
├── .dockerignore
├── .editorconfig
├── .eleventy.js                    # Eleventy config entrypoint
├─  .eleventyignore
├── .gitattributes
├── .gitignore
├── Dockerfile                      # Multi-stage build (Node -> Nginx)
├── nginx.conf                      # Nginx config for serving the built site
├── postcss.config.js               # PostCSS configuration
├── tailwind.config.js              # Tailwind configuration
├── package.json                    # Scripts + dependencies + Eleventy directory config
├── yarn.lock
└── LICENSE
```

## Docker

A multi-stage Docker build is used:

1. **Build stage**: installs deps + runs `yarn build` to generate `dist/`
2. **Production stage**: serves `dist/` via `nginx`

## Deployments (high-level)

- Docker images are built and published via GitHub Actions.
- Deployments use Nomad job specifications in `.github/deploy/` for:

>     - **Production** (`production.hcl`)
>     - **Review** per-branch (`review.hcl`)
> ## Running locally with Docker

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - **Review** per-branch (`review.hcl`)

## Running locally with Docker
```
